Let's talk about auto-configuration.
Auto-configuration is a feature of Spring Boot that provides a
best-guess configuration for an application,
and as the documentation states,
it attempts to automatically configure your Spring application
based on the dependencies that you've added to it.
And it does this by being both contextually aware and smart.
Let's look at a real-life analogy.
If you were to hand someone a plate,
it's completely reasonable and normal to assume that you
might also hand them a fork and a knife,
but if you hand someone a plate with a cookie on it,
you're probably not going to be using that fork and knife.
So based on the context at hand, that is,
whether or not the plate had a cookie on it,
determined whether or not you needed to set up the
plate with a fork and a knife.
Well, Spring Boot works a lot in the same way.
It saves the developer time by making use of context to best
guess how an application should be set up.
So for instance,
if Spring Boot notices that an application has a certain
dependency that is related to a database,
it can make a reasonable assumption that it should probably
configure certain things to access that database,
and even more so if that dependency is for a very specific database,
such as Oracle or MySQL,
Spring Boot can make an even better assumption and probably set up
features that may be specific to that certain database.
For the developer, setting up auto-configuration is extremely easy.
The developer only needs to add one annotation to their Spring Boot application.
That's the @EnableAutoConfiguration annotation.
And if you're not familiar with what annotations are,
that's the thing with the @ symbol,
think of them as additional metadata that's added to the code that can be
read at runtime and you can use to make decisions upon.
Really though, don't worry about the code, it's not really the point.
The point here is that it's really, really easy to enable.
And likewise, configurations are also really easy to disable.
It's not sort of this all or nothing thing.
Spring Boot tries to make them as noninvasive as possible. So if they get in the way, they can easily be removed.